[Music]
[Applause]
you guys ready to go awesome so um
yeah so these guys are this this panel
is all about the macular collective
which is based in Rotterdam and we have
three members of the collective here
Eric Perrin Nicky Osmond and yours stre
pose hopefully I said that close enough
and the moderator for this panel is
Sophie lampeter there's actually one of
my best friend she's fantastic she is
the associate director at Swiss snacks
she was my favorite moderator from last
year so she's got a step of the game I
think they're gonna be going through
they're going to be doing this sort of
like organic format where they'll go
through a series of links and she'll
also ask questions hopefully we'll have
a little bit of time for the for
audience questions but we'll see how
that goes but if you haven't of course
you all walked in and you saw all of the
kinetic sculptures in the exhibition and
these are the people that made these and
brought them and we ship them all the
way from Rotterdam so please give a
round of applause for the macular
collective and Sophie
thank you so much was it thank you so
much also for putting this up and for
running grey area I think it's something
that Tiffany said as well before it's so
important that we are bringing
disciplines together and that we're
starting to talk the same language
especially in in this city where art and
technology has been a bit disconnected
and I think grey area is the center
point for bringing that together and
also creating understanding so my name
is Sophie I work at Swiss necks for
those who don't know were based here in
San Francisco and it's like an
innovation outpost for Switzerland and
what we're doing is we're connecting
university startups entrepreneurship
innovation art and design and we're
doing that most often in inter
disciplinary way because most of the
time a researcher knows already the
researcher living in another country
working on the same topic but maybe he
doesn't know that an artist or designer
is thinking about the same questions or
doesn't know that there is already a
company solution working on that same
idea and so I'm really really a believer
in interdisciplinary collaboration an
interdisciplinary approach is bringing
disciplines together to really tackle
world's problem I think there is often a
risk that we're as I said before that
we're not speaking the same language or
they were using different microscope
looking at something and not even
understanding that we're actually
looking at the same things and I'm happy
that I was chosen to moderate this panel
because i think the macular collective
does a fantastic job like that and i
think it's exactly what they're about in
my understanding is staying curious
taking things from all the different
disciplines bringing it together and and
also keep asking questions without
having the fear that this is maybe a
discipline that is not from yours so
bringing these things together and I'm
also happy that they're from the
Netherlands because the Netherlands are
supporting artists who travel to the US
and by making it happen that we can also
show their pieces here and I hope all of
you have that time to see some of them
it's the four big pieces when you come
right in maybe I say quickly something
about them so you can talk to them right
afterwards so the main piece when you
come in is from joris its revolve it's
that kinetic sculpture that turns then
there is liquid solid made by niki enter
it together
which is todos freezing so soap film
installation there's own doll tour made
by you Eric that is here on the side and
then there is also the multi studies
that you see in the left so after I
think you guys are staying here to
Sunday there's also big performance then
so there will be around chat with them
and learn from them and so that's what I
was trying to do with them today we said
like hey let's just talk about work that
let's talk about what you made let's
talk about what inspired you so we're
gonna go
with a run-through of like experiences
and inspiration and your own work and I
think maybe start with your own work
whoever wants to kick off sure so my
name is Nikki Osmond and
actually maybe a
real sort of macular collectivism is
based or is consist of six artists but
we all come from the same education and
namely art school called art science and
so we all did the same studies and
we found each other in this in this
communal how do you say Camino ideas of
our technology and perception and so one
of my works that was made during that
studies as a master was is called solace
and if you can run the video it's a
kinetic machine
this put it on full screen
it's a kinetic machine that consists of
a water bath am filled with soapy water
and
it lifts up a
sheet of soap film so if you know a soap
bubble it's the same but then a
two-dimensional screen so before are
times I studied film science so I have a
lot in my work the cinema
cinematographic reference I'm very
excited about the talk by Jean
Youngblood tomorrow because my thesis
was on expanded cinema and
synesthesia in art and so I look a lot
at the cinematic apparatus and how you
can convey this into a space so to go
out of the cinema to work with the space
and basically i created this sort of set
up like a theater setup and to show you
this abstract experimental film of soap
soap fill so you look at a sheet of soap
film of i have to calculate in feet but
i think its nine feet 3 by 4 meters nine
by nine feet so it's a reference also to
this video this old video screen and so
the way it's been set up it's been set
up with the space and light and and
that's what brings forward these
iridescent colors that's in a rent of
the soap film and
it will display this
colorful sheet of soap film but it also
has other aspects namely it will reflect
you it works as a mirror basically so
the audience that sense in front of it
now you see only this camera in front of
it but usually there's an audience in
front of it so you will also see this
distorted version of yourself
so this is like a continuous
installation and why I like this or why
I chose this installation version is
that I like the chicken it's more free
you can come in you can choose how long
you want to stay there I put up some
benches because some people really
wanted to stay for a long time so it's
about creating this meditative space and
also from cinema the vision is the main
sense but what I would like to do in my
work is approach all the senses so it's
about this sensorial experience and I
think you also noticed this in the
exhibition
maybe the dominant one is vision but in
this insulation like before you enter
the space you will smell the soap so
also I try to approach all these other
senses also detect I'll sense the
humidity is raised to keep these soap
films up and so it's a very like glam
space and
that you're being touched by light so
all these metaphorical thinking about
working differently with the space and
the senses and the sensorial experience
can you maybe say something how this
work led to the work that we have in the
show now so one of the works is called
liquid solid after this experiment
I had read somewhere so one of them like
how I work is that I'm inspired by
science and by scientific research and
natural phenomena and I think this is
also for a for the rest of us the same
and I had read somewhere that you can
freeze soap bubble so I thought okay I
can do the same with the soap film but
you need minus 30 degrees Celsius I
don't know what this is in the Phantom
height but very really cold really cool
and so somebody suggested to me this
ahead proposes to so in the collective
we work together there's room for
collaborations that's the main part so
we talked about doing this project
together and somebody suggested that
there's this art science residency
artist in residence in the north of
Finland in the Arctic region where it
gets this cold during the winter and
they invite artists to come work and
collaborate in the lab with the
scientists or with the Arctic landscape
and so we went there and
and and and started to research the
cinematic qualities of freezing soap
film so the film you see here the
installation is a video installation of
an 80-minute loop the first part is
still very colorful you recognize the
soap film
but you see that the viscosity has
changed so that's around minus 6 degrees
and what happens is the process just
slows down so
like normally a soap phone would last a
minute this lasted like 30 minutes so we
took like a short example or 15-minute
take of that like you slowly see the
soap because of gravity it goes down and
it slowly starts to freeze and it
because viscosity becomes more therapy
instead of fluid and then the second
part where you see the crystals is where
it's actually like close to minus 25
degrees Celsius and then the iridescent
aspect of this opium is completely gone
and it starts to crystallize and freezes
quite quickly and then with that we made
a soundtrack because
like we don't explain what the process
is we just should we make a composition
with the images and make our own
soundtrack so the end result is not to
show to demonstrate this scientific
process but just to make an artwork with
it
yeah maybe you want to show your work
that you brought with you jars um I can
talk a bit about the revolt piece
let me just see where it is or not maybe
maybe this is a good way to start like
this is a work I did some time ago it's
called phases order I'll play the video
you can see what it is it's a it's a
kinetic light sculpture and it's it
consists of 96
panels that move was here in a minute
and
the ID for this came from the swarming
phenomena that you see with birds so I
was looking at these patterns and I
wanted to capture that in a mechanical
sculpture so you see how they move and
they
there's kind of this algorithm going on
that they are looking at each other and
they and they move along along that way
and what I what I like about this is
that when people see it is they have the
feeling that they are looking at this
kind of natural phenomena but it's it's
like all completely artificial materials
and I think that's the part where I'm
interested in where these border is
between the natural and artificial and
how these have a certain relationship
maybe it's good to also see the revolt
piece
moving i think maybe people saw it here
in the front it's the rotating LED
installation just gonna see where that
is in the computer
so it's this
piece
and for this the idea was to
to make a visual visual music piece we
were interested in the idea of making a
music 440 I so we work with rhythm and
intensity to create this kind of
abstract experience
and the second part is that we wanted
like we work before a lot with
images generated in the computer and
using projectors but we wanted to try to
to create some kind of volume of screen
that you really have the feeling of this
kind of 3d shape that works in the space
I
think I think a lot of the work that we
do is relate it to cinema but
moving it into a different space and I
think would revolve it's it's trying to
create a cinematic experience but making
that as a as a physical object
can you show the undulator piece so my
work in the exhibition is sort of
reducing cinema to its basic qualities
light and a screen and then introducing
an element of
physics in there so there's a kinetic
element to it
the it's a light source that projects
color and gradients onto a moving
reflective surface and what you see on
the screen is basically the the physics
that happen of the light source being
reflected or refracted from the source
and so part of it is about perception
also
I think can revolve the flickering of
the image you get these after images and
in my piece there's also a lot of
flickering where you your perceptual
system is being pushed to the limits and
I think a lot of the works in our
collective are about trying to
push your preceptory system or mess with
your preceptory system to to give you an
experience that you would not easily
have otherwise right
that's also why a lot of these words are
hard to film because you have to it's
about this physical experience also in
that sense like what you say about um we
all
grew up in this both analog and then
digital world and I think a lot of our
work is returning to this physical
component and physical experience and
the same as for leaving the the cinema
leaving the the screen and trying to
make this space this environment that
you can experience with your whole body
yeah I think results are something that
I series always this relationship
between a natural phenomena and the
Machine when an artificial one and I
thought something very interesting you
told me yesterday is that a lot of
people look at his piece and actually
think it's some sort of algorithm that
is producing the images so we are
already expecting some sort of more
technology behind certain things and
it's very similar with your work maybe
can speak a bit about that yeah it's a
funny thing that when people see that
work I have gotten the question pretty
often so what kind of fluid dynamics
simulation are you using or what
happened and it's and then I explain to
people what it is and they still don't
understand that there's no software
involved basically and it's it's very
strange that people are conditioned to
just think oh it's you know art and
technology there should be some kind of
high high tech software involved but
I I really love the idea of just using
simple simple means to to get to a
natural organic result
you get that since we're not using a
technology to promote the technology or
to like it's like it's like a tool for
us it's it's like how a painter would
use a paintbrush and it just gives us
more possibilities but the the main goal
is to make an artwork that can be
experienced and
and that it should never be about the
technology itself maybe you're as you
can show a gut feeling
so on Sunday night we're doing a program
of
experimental films that are made by us
and by other Dutch filmmakers and we're
doing also to live audio visual
performances and the piece that I'm
doing is called gut feeling and I
created this piece while I was at UCLA
and
I stumbled into their
nano labs the california nanosystems
institute where i saw all these crazy
machines and
one thing that hit me is that scientists
are like us they don't know what they're
doing they're they're looking for
something they don't always know exactly
what they're looking for and they're
hacking these machines together to find
something new and I really like that and
so one of my interests like visual
perception they had these amazing
microscopes there and so I
started chatting with
one of the scientists there who ran one
of the labs and I convince him to let me
use his microscope and and i ended up
collaborating with a synthetic biologist
who provided me with a genetically
modified bacteria and so i created a
film and it's also a live performance
that is based on
movement and growth experiments with
these e coli bacteria and so that is you
know there's a lot of sort of high-tech
stuff involved in that but the end
result if you'll come on sunday is it
really meant as a
an artwork or perceptual experience
can you speak a bit about how the
reaction of the researchers were to your
work or your questions that you ask and
how ur day involves or how was the
exchange um so the person that I worked
with who ran the lab he
there's at you silly there's as arts I
center so there is this setup for
artists and scientists to collaborate
and he's one of the main people who's
involved with that so he was really open
to the idea and he was really
encouraging me to use the lab one of the
thing was I could only use a lab when
there weren't any wasn't any research
being done so i was there usually from
like 12
at night till 6am but that was that was
a funny experience alone alone all by
myself yes but then I also encountered
some scientists were I tried to sort of
explain what I wanted to do but it was
really hard to convey what my goal was
they were interested in having me there
and they were
happy to have me around and explain
everything to me but I did feel that it
was difficult to have the exact
conversation that I wanted to have with
them about what my work was about it was
well
can't say I totally understood exactly
what they were doing but it was easy to
talk with them about their work but the
other way around I had a bit more of
difficulty
communicating that
when I show the piece I've had very
interesting conversations with people
who work in the field of microscopy or
synthetic biology genetic engineering so
in the end the piece works but while
working in the lab it you know you're
you're you're out of place a little bit
yeah yeah I imagine it takes a while
until you start speaking the same
language yeah exactly yeah yeah yeah
yeah we've done the several projects
together maybe you familiar with the
artist in residency program at CERN I
think it's a fantastic or at science
program and they're very it's a very
small program so they're very carefully
like choosing artists that are asking or
working on specific fields emerging them
the scientists and they also published a
so-called manifesto for art and science
collaboration and I remember it right
well quite well it had this three things
that art and science should not be and
it's at first our science shouldn't be
visualization shooting p for
communicating science second we the
scientific process that shouldn't be
just about the process that the artist
is using and the third one it it's a
problem when the science becomes the art
so when you just do like a big
microscopic picture blew it up and hang
it into a gallery and I don't know maybe
you can comment a bit on that or for
your experiences
how to really make a project where both
sides are influenced or interact or play
video so you're pushing both fields a
bit further I think it's really
difficult actually it happens a lot that
it either becomes an illustration for
the scientist or the the artist just
take something and and doesn't really
like respect the science or do something
with it I think for a lot of us though
we sort of look at what is happening in
science and then
create our own idea of what that means
and kind of run with it is this this
works for me really well because I start
with something with it absolutely no
knowledge um
whatsoever until or like just one factor
which grasped me and like tickles me to
to continue in that field and then this
allows for such a freedom that I do
things that in scientists would probably
never do because they already know about
limitations certain limitations of the
material and I I just don't have that
knowledge allows you start to work and
plane so I think this freedom is very
important in creating the artwork and
that you are not limited by this already
knowledge of limitations of the
materials and just find new entries in
the work I think that can also be a
mutual thing for the scientists what's
interesting and because you approached
me because in your right like ensuring
the southam so film is actually a lot
used in science because of the looking
at turbulence how turbulence works and
fluid amex so yeah in that sense
that's interesting for them and I
don't know
it's I think it's difficult to create
this mutual collaboration that's really
about pushing both a in a barrel of a
manner mm yeah I think CERN is it may be
a good example you need time and money
that both parties can really work when
chili on it yeah
yeah maybe we can talk a bit about other
people's work that inspired you in that
field of art tech in science I asked
them to each one of them choose choose a
piece that we could show here and
discuss a little bit what the
inspiration is or what they took from it
who wants to start
um I think it's good to look at this
piece by Thomas Wilfred he's like one of
the founders of this visual music
fullscreen fullscreen
so it's it's it's a silent piece and
it's basically there's there are light
sources and he uses all these mechanical
rotating devices to create this abstract
light work
one of his ideas was he created this
Lumia and it was kind of this small
television skill
object with the ID that people could
have that in their home and just to look
at it in the night instead of like this
television this was at the time when
television wasn't super common yet and
so he thought instead of television
everybody's gonna have this light art
device in their house and people are
gonna sit on the couch and watch light
shows yeah
I
love that yeah would be a lot better I
guess yeah
and so it actually under later is
heavily inspired by Thomas Rupert so its
work i was i was actually building
myself of small Lumia box and sort of
this is an accidental result of me
messing around with the with the
materials to build that kind of self I
think this this these accidents and
displaying and experimenting it's a it's
a big part of our work just playing with
materials with certain ideas concepts
and uh by playing finding out their
qualities and characteristics and
aspects so was it more like stumble over
in it and rather looking for something
that you already have in mind yeah and
again this is like this is cinema but
it's an extremely physical type of
cinema you know built out of lights and
and and
objects moving moving objects so that
went from one is this this is like 36 40
something like that maybe the video says
it
yeah i think this this is one of his
latest yeah so 48 yeah so for me that's
also one of the things that I'm really
interested in is like we work in art and
technology um and there's his idea like
oh we're doing the newest latest thing
but actually there's a really big
history to all of this and I think it's
really important to be aware of that and
and and it's also a lot of Forgotten
technology yeah that's very interesting
and to work with I think also going back
to to these pure things like huh what
slide how is it working all these
aspects yeah I think because I like it
that is that you can work with very
simple elements like I think most of
these work could it could have also been
done like decades ago
although the Arduino ever ask me goodbye
makes it easy but technically it's
possible to do these things maybe you
can show the
Gordon pass quark
that this one
so it's kind of hard to find good
footage of this but if you scroll down
all the way or far far far so this is in
1968 there was this exhibit in London
cybernetics serendipity uh that's like
you know it's famous in media art
circles for being one of the first big
shows that showed interactive
installations and robotics and all that
kind of stuff and this is a piece by
Gordon Gordon Pask and I only found out
about it recently what it really does
because it's hard to find good
information on it there's a little bit
of information but so basically this is
a 5 mobiles three of them are female two
of them are male and they communicate
through shooting lights at each other
and reflecting them with mirrors so
again there's lights and mirrors but
this also includes to Gordon Pask was
cyber notation and so he was an artist
and a scientist at the same time he was
interested in psychology and so this
work is is a kinetic sculpture but the
females and males try to learn from each
other and try to develop a language and
so
there's some computer far off because at
that time there weren't any little
Arduino is a raspberry PI's to stick in
there and they start off not knowing
about each other but through feedback
mechanisms they
learn to communicate with each other and
so certain movements start to happen
more often because they know that oh
this way I will be in touch with that
guy in this way I'll be in touch with
with this guy and so this again goes
back to like this is like a very
interesting sort of way of
networking I guess and creating an
artificial language it's sort of a I
stuff but it's you know 1968 a piece but
what I really like about this way of
working is that you create this
generative system which at some point
will will run by itself by interaction
and and for us as humans basically just
like this generative composition for
lights and movement and
and it becomes a thing where they have
their own sort of secret language and I
really like that where the there's a
systems to systems language inside there
that we as humans we can look at it and
we can enjoy it but the machines are
talking among themselves and I really
love that idea i think is very poetic
very relevant again today yes I don't
you understand hot wok machines are you
kidding around us yeah yeah exactly yeah
so with the end with the UM the
deep deep learning learning yeah there
are even people using it don't quite
know know how it works yeah yeah
we show the cp's my curtain schlager so
um
when I was talking about expanded a
cinema
this for me is like and being immersed
in a space this for me was like the main
example that I experienced being
immersed in
this sensory overload I think for all of
us yeah yeah so you may scribe what it
was for people who haven't so um
the piece is made by curtain slacker
who's based in Chicago is originally
from Austria he was part of a duo called
granular synthesis um and then started
to work on his own the piece is a an
installation that you can experience
it's a space filled with fog and then
you enter you enter actually by holding
a rope because you can't see too far and
the you can see about like five inches
the UH ninjas in front of you dare with
many people but you don't know exactly
where they are although you have this
sense of
presence of other people yeah definitely
yeah and so what's on is a composition
for stroboscopic lights and pulse lights
and I'm what starts to happen is because
you our eyes are in the fog is so thick
the stroboscopic lights will start to
create hallucinatory patterns in your
eyes in your vision and this is very
intense because you're already in a bit
closed off space because of the and
then these very intense button start to
visualize in your perception in front of
you and
it's so you are completely disoriented
and you can wander through space and
yeah I don't know what happens what
happened to me is that maybe you can
show the film that people because with
all these things really hard to it's
actually like erasing the space just
taking the space away by blurring here
it's really hard to two films such a
buddy you can't film this so what he did
was make it the video with where people
explain how they experienced it there's
also a sound component to it right yeah
so there's a very present yeah it's a
very specific sound composition that's
also a
pulsing and you know the flickering
light and the pulsing sound sort of get
your brainwaves going in a very intense
way I guess I don't know I don't know
how I want to word it
it's really hard to say something smart
about something that's so like pewdie
sensual it's just light
I know by all the images or what you
like create yeah
um it was the most insane thing I've
ever been a part of at first it was
extremely uncomfortable I really wanted
out the anxiety was
almost scary he opens the first door and
it's like boom what's your visibility
starts going you're kind of like okay
well what's what's happening you don't
even know where you are you lose your
sense of space-time motion I mean I
didn't even know he's in there for 20
minutes I would have guessed like two
minutes it did feel a bit like death you
know like if you don't have a body is
this what your existence is like if you
went to heaven like it felt like it
would be like entering heaven I've never
I've never felt like that ever that like
happened so purely in your own brain
pinned that it's impossible to even
compare to anybody else's
I'm just a nothing I think we got we got
the point right yeah if you ever get the
chance to see it go see it cuz it's yeah
it's amazing it's really good
yeah maybe we can we only have five
minutes left maybe we can talk a little
bit what's coming up or any projects
that you have in mind I know you're
dreaming about doing something here in
the US something larger as a collective
I think what part of this tour is to to
research the IDS of creating a new sort
of research lab which which would work
with a mixture between new media art and
different kinds of land art we got
interested in this idea of using green
energy sources like Sun and wind power
and kind of harvest that and use that in
setting stuff in motion or are using it
for for audio-visual sculptures
do you want to show I just go maybe yeah
because I did one work
which is kind of recent and is this
installation this was done in Norway
right in the top of Enki oconus it's a
commissioned work by this project called
dark ecology
and it's actually it's these 12
wind turbines and they will rotate they
will generate energy and they will use
this energy
for sound and light composition inside
the units there's also a light sensor so
they will influence each other in the
way they produce their sound and
so
this actually heart like goes back to
the Gordon Pask work so directly I
really like that actually the the
nineteen sixty eight piece has so much
of these elements in it I can I can play
a bit so you can see it functioning
so this was in the in November and in
November in the Arctic region the Sun
doesn't rise anymore so you have a polar
night and
which means that there's a little bit of
Twilight but the most of the day it's
it's dark and so it really felt like
this group of to me it felt like a group
of aliens landed on this mountain and
we're like trying to communicate either
with each other or with us and was a
really bizarre experience it's like what
one of the main points of departure was
like I was invited there to just enjoy
the first
journey that they organized and to just
get inspired by the region and we saw
the wall out there and it came to mind
to just like how would it be if there
would be some kind of manmade phenomena
somewhere in these in these mountains
there that you would have liked
functioning there under circum shirt
circumstances
like so it's wind driven but also it
wouldn't work if it would be light or if
there was no wind so it's like this this
phenomena that you can experience only
when it's when everything is in the in
the right order so you need a natural
phenomena amplified by human creation
and the Machine yeah beautiful I think
is really beautiful about it also like
you can just leave that there and nobody
has to watch it and it can take it can
just be there and live and I really I
really like that yes that's also the
goal to create this land art piece that
can just go and it self sustainable one
yeah so yeah by using green energy to
create a piece somewhere like we were
thinking out in Utah in the desert or in
Joshua Tree to research the
possibilities of setting up
a
man nature machine that lives there and
and you know you can go visit it if you
want but it just lives there
yeah so that's that's that's coming up
we're going to go to Joshua Tree in
next week's someone I got ya do some
research to talk to people
great we're excited to see what's coming
out of that so yeah the three of them
are here till sunday talk to them and
also sign up for the performance on
sunday and the screening i think it
would be very fantastic thank you so
much thank you so much for coming all
the way
[Applause]